---
date: 2016/07/22
title: Terms of Service
---

These terms of service apply to the use of Numenta’s streaming analytics product
as distributed through cloud service providers (the Grok Product) and for the
use of Numenta’s web site. Together, the Grok Product and the Numenta web site
are called the Numenta Offering.

### 1. ACCEPTANCE OF TERMS

If you do not agree to these Terms, you should not use the Numenta Offering. We
reserve the right to change, modify, add or remove portions of these Terms
periodically. Such modifications shall be effective immediately upon posting of
the modified Terms to the Numenta website. Your continued use of the Numenta
Offering will mean that you accept these terms.

### 2. NO UNLAWFUL OR PROHIBITED USE

You warrant to Numenta that you will not use the Numenta Offering, or any of the
content therein, for any purpose that is unlawful or that is prohibited by these
Terms.

### 3. LICENSE GRANT

Your rights to access, download, and use the Grok Product will be subject to the
terms and conditions of the software license agreement provided on the cloud
service provider’s site through which it is distributed.

### 4. YOUR CONTENT

Numenta will not pre-screen or review your content, but Numenta shall have the
right (but not the obligation) in its sole discretion to refuse or delete any
content that it reasonably considers to violate the Terms or to be otherwise
illegal.

You grant Numenta the right to review your content for the purposes of debugging
the Numenta Offering and for providing you with technical support. Numenta will
not share your content with others without your explicit, written permission,
except in the case where being required to do so by the appropriate court or
government agency.

### 5. TERMINATION

We may terminate your use of the Numenta Offering if we have reasonable belief
that your use: 1) violates these Terms; or 2) abuses site resources or attempts
to gain unauthorized entry to the site or site resources; or 3) we are required
to do so by law, regulation, court or governing agency order.

Our termination of any user's access to the Numenta Offering may be effected
without notice and, on such termination, we may immediately deactivate or delete
user's account and/or bar any further access to such files. Numenta shall not be
liable to any Numenta user or other third party for any such termination.

You may terminate your use of the Numenta Offering by stopping its use without
notice to us.

### 6. PAYMENT

The Numenta Product is delivered through a cloud service provider’s marketplace.
You will abide by the payment terms as detailed in that marketplace. If you do
not wish to continue using and paying for the Numenta Product, you may stop
using it at any time, and further charges will not accrue. We do not offer
refunds for any amounts paid.

### 7. LINKS

To the extent the Numenta website includes links to third parties, Numenta is
not responsible or liable for the content of such sites. The Numenta website
privacy statement is applicable only when you are on the Numenta websites.

### 8. SUPPORT

Technical support for the Grok Product is provided by email. We will make a
reasonable effort to respond to your email within 48 hours. Support inquiries
are to be sent to support@numenta.com.

### 9. TRADEMARK INFORMATION

Numenta, Grok, NuPIC, and the Numenta, Grok and NuPIC trademarks, logos and
service marks are the intellectual property of Numenta, Inc.

All trademarks, trade names, service marks and logos referenced herein are the
property of their respective owners.

### 10. COPYRIGHTS

If you believe that your work has been copied and is accessible in the Numenta
Offering in a way that constitutes copyright infringement, you may notify us by
providing our copyright agent with the following information in writing:

* the electronic or physical signature of the owner of the copyright or the
  person authorized to act on the owner's behalf;

* identification of the copyrighted work that you claim has been infringed;

* identification of the material that is claimed to be infringing and
  information reasonably sufficient to permit Grok to locate the material;

* your name, address, telephone number, and email address;

* a statement by you that you have a good faith belief that the disputed use is
  not authorized by the copyright owner, its agent, or the law;

* a statement, made under penalty of perjury, that the above information in
your Notice is accurate and that you are the copyright owner or are authorized
to act on the copyright owner's behalf.

If Numenta receives such a claim, Numenta will investigate and report back to
the complainant. Numenta reserves the right to delete such reported content or
to terminate a user's account.

Our designated agent to receive notification of claimed infringement under the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act OF 1998 ("DMCA") is:
[dmca@numenta.com](mailto:dmca@numenta.com)

### 11. VIOLATIONS OF TERMS

Please report any violations of the Terms to
[info@numenta.com](mailto:info@numenta.com).

### 12. PRIVACY

Our Privacy Policy is located
at [http://numenta.com/legal/privacy/](/legal/privacy/).
