---
author: Numenta
brief: "REDWOOD CITY, CA – June 19, 2017— The exponential increase in the use of connected real-time sensors to surface streaming data in the age of the Internet of Things presents significant challenges and opportunities for the emerging field of streaming analytics."
date: 2017/06/20
org: Press Release
tags: numenta brain theory machine learning techniques htm hierarchical realtime anomaly detection paper
image: ../images/image.png
title: "New Research Paper from Numenta Demonstrates Results of Machine Intelligence Algorithm on Real-time Anomaly Detection for Streaming Data"
type: post

---

## Media Alert

**REDWOOD CITY, CA – June 19, 2017 —** The exponential increase in the
use of connected real-time sensors to surface streaming data in the age
of the Internet of Things presents significant challenges and
opportunities for the emerging field of streaming analytics. Detection
of anomalies in streaming data, in particular, has becoming an
increasingly important application across a large number of industries
for critical use cases – ranging from preventative maintenance to fraud
prevention, fault detection, and systems monitoring. But the real-time
nature of streaming data has presented challenges for applying classic
AI and machine learning techniques to date.

Neuroscience and machine intelligence researchers at Numenta Inc. have
demonstrated how a novel anomaly detection algorithm, based on their
theory of how the brain works, can tackle the problem with a technique
that meets the requirements of streaming data by processing data in
real-time and offering continuous, online detection without supervision
– while simultaneously making predictions. The technique is based on an
online sequence memory algorithm called Hierarchical Temporal Memory
(HTM).

Numenta researchers have described the technique in a new peer-reviewed
paper, ***Unsupervised real-time anomaly detection for streaming data,
\**** published in a special issue of
[***Neurocomputing.***](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231217309864)

In the new paper, the researchers also present the results of using the
Numenta Anomaly Benchmark (NAB), a benchmark containing real-world data
streams with labeled anomalies. NAB, an open-source benchmark and tool
designed to help data researchers evaluate the effectiveness of
algorithms for anomaly detection in streaming, real-time applications,
was first presented in 2015 during the [IEEE Conference on Machine
Learning and
Applications](http://numenta.us2.list-manage2.com/track/click?u=b838879da2baa539870afd320&id=7fd62631b0&e=3cd8237d8d).
NAB provides a first-of-its-kind controlled open-source environment for
testing a wide range of anomaly detection algorithms on streaming data.
Numenta offers the open standard benchmark for the research community to
use, add to, and even draw inspiration from for new, innovative
techniques.

“While many anomaly detection approaches exist for time-series data, the
majority of methods are limited and apply statistical techniques that
are computationally lightweight for streaming analytics. The versatile
properties of HTM, which are patterned after the principles of how the
brain works, make it well suited for streaming anomaly detection, ” said
Numenta Research VP Subutai Ahmad.

“We are bridging the gap between neuroscience and AI by using brain
function as a guide to solving machine learning problems and designing
more intelligent systems,” added Ahmad.

The release of the latest technical paper in ***Neurocomputing***, which
Ahmad co-authored with Numenta researchers Alexander Lavin, Scott Purdy
and Zuha Agha, is in keeping with Numenta’s [open research
philosophy](/blog/2014/09/17/increasing-research-transparency/).
Numenta researchers’ previously published peer-reviewed works published
in the journals
[***Frontiers***](http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fncir.2016.00023/full)
and [***Neural
Computation***](/resources/papers/continuous-online-sequence-learning-with-an-unsupervised-neural-network-model/),
among others.

**Numenta Article** ***What Intelligent Machines Need to Learn from the
Neocortex*** **Appears in** ***IEEE Spectrum***

Numenta’s work at the intersection of neuroscience and AI is also
featured in the current issue of ***IEEE Spectrum*** magazine. The
special issue on worldwide efforts to understand the human brain to use
the knowledge to build next-generation computers features a by-lined
article by Numenta co-founder Jeff Hawkins.

In the article, Hawkins argues why understanding the brain is critical
for building intelligent machines. Hawkins writes: “Although
machine-learning techniques such as deep neural networks have recently
made impressive gains, they are still a world away from being
intelligent, from being able to understand and act in the world the way
we do. The only example of intelligence, of the ability to learn from
the world, to plan and to execute, is the brain. Therefore, we must
understand the principles underlying human intelligence and use them to
guide us in the development of truly intelligent machines. ”

For the complete IEEE article go
[here](http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/software/what-intelligent-machines-need-to-learn-from-the-neocortex).


### About Numenta

Numenta scientists and engineers are working on one of science’s grand
challenges: how the brain works and how brain principles will be used in
Machine Intelligence.

Founded in 2005, Numenta is developing a theory of how the neocortex
works. We create software technologies based on this theory and apply
them to machine learning applications for continuously streaming data.
Numenta publishes its progress in scientific journals and makes all of
its code public in an [open source project](http://www.numenta.org).

**Sources:**<br/>
\* *Subutai Ahmad, Alexander Lavin, Scott Purdy and Zuha Agha (2017)
Unsupervised real-time anomaly detection for streaming data.
Neurocomputing*. ***<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2017.04.070>***

**Numenta Media Contact:**<br/>
Betty Taylor <br/>
Krause Taylor Associates <br/>
[bettyt@krause-taylor.com](mailto:bettyt@krause-taylor.com) <br/>
[408-981-7551](tel:+1-408-981-7551) <br/>
