---
title: HTM Studio Terms and Conditions
---

**Numenta is happy to license HTM Studio to you if you accept all of the terms
and conditions contained in this Agreement.** By accepting this agreement and
downloading HTM Studio, you indicate that you have read and understand this
Agreement and accept all of its terms and conditions. If you agree to these
terms and conditions on behalf of a business, government agency, or other
entity, you warrant that you have authority to bind that business, agency, or
other entity to this Agreement, and your agreement to these terms and conditions
will be treated as the agreement of that business, agency, or other entity. In
that event, “you” and “your” refer herein to that business, agency, or other
entity.

### PREAMBLE

The purpose of this Preamble is to give a plain English description of this
Agreement. Please read the rest of the Agreement carefully for detailed terms
and conditions.

Numenta welcomes individuals, businesses, and other entities to explore and
advance HTM technology. This license allows you to explore HTM ideas using HTM
Studio in whole or in part, at no charge, as long as your work is for research
and experimentation purposes only. You may not sell or distribute any portion of
HTM Studio or your work product for commercial or production use unless you take
an appropriate commercial license from us.

HTM Studio collects anonymized application activity statistics (clicks, menus
opened, etc.) and reports them to Numenta so we can learn about the use of HTM
Studio and continue to improve it. **HTM Studio will never collect or report
information about HTM Studio users (names, IP addresses, etc.) or users’ data
(file names, data points, results, etc.).**

1. **Definitions**.

  **“HTM”** means the Hierarchical Temporal Memory theory.

  **“NuPIC”** means the Numenta Platform for Intelligent Computing. All NuPIC
  code is made available through the "numenta" GitHub organization at
  http://github.com/numenta, under an AGPLv3 license.

  **“HTM Studio”** refers to the application that can be used to find anomalies
  in streaming data. All HTM Studio code is made available through the "numenta"
  GitHub organization at http://github.com/numenta, under an AGPLv3 license.

2. **License, Permitted Uses, Restrictions, and Ownership.**

  * (a) **License**. Numenta hereby grants you a non-exclusive,
    non-transferable, royalty-free license during the term of this Agreement to
    install and use HTM Studio for the permitted uses detailed in section 2(b)
    subject to the restrictions detailed in section 2&#40;c).  Any technology that
    does not exist at http://github.com/numenta with an AGPL license is not
    included in this License.

  * (b) **Permitted Uses**. You may use HTM Studio to conduct research and
    analysis. You may use HTM Studio for evaluation of HTM and for validation of
    its applicability to specific problems. You may use HTM Studio for
    instruction and training. You may publish information regarding the results
    of your research as long as you include an appropriate citation. You may
    modify and create derivative works of HTM Studio.

  * &#40;c) **Restrictions**. You may not offer for sale, distribute, or permit
    others to use any technology that includes the HTM Studio or NuPIC software
    or intellectual property, either free or for a fee, unless you have entered
    into an appropriate Numenta commercial license agreement.

  * (d) **Ownership of Intellectual Property**. You agree that Numenta owns all
    right, title and interest, including but not limited to copyright, patent,
    trade secret and all other intellectual property rights, in and to HTM
    Studio and NuPIC, and any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto
    that are made by or for Numenta. You hereby grant to Numenta a perpetual,
    irrevocable, world-wide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, license to use any
    feedback, suggestions, or ideas that you provide directly to Numenta
    regarding HTM Studio or NuPIC.

3. **Application Analytics.** HTM Studio collects anonymized application
  activity statistics, including but not limited to user clicks and frequency
  and order of menus opened in the application. These statistics are reported to
  Numenta. By accepting this agreement and downloading HTM Studio, you give your
  permission for Numenta to collect and use these statistics. HTM Studio will
  never collect or report information about HTM Studio users (names, IP
  addresses, etc.) or users’ data (file names, data points, results, etc.).

4. **Software Updates.** HTM Studio may automatically download and install
  updates from time to time from Numenta. These updates are designed to improve,
  enhance and further develop HTM Studio and may take the form of bug fixes,
  enhanced functions, new software modules and completely new versions. You
  agree to receive such updates (and permit Numenta to deliver these to you) as
  part of your use of HTM Studio.

5. **No Support.** You acknowledge and agree that Numenta undertakes no
  obligation to provide any support, error corrections, or upgrades for HTM
  Studio, and that you assume all risk arising from your use of HTM Studio.

6. **Termination.** You may terminate this Agreement at any time upon written
  notice to Numenta. Either party may terminate this Agreement immediately upon
  written notice to the other party: (i) in the event of the insolvency,
  bankruptcy or voluntary dissolution of the other party; or (ii) if the other
  party defaults in the performance of any provision hereunder, and if such
  default continues and is not cured within thirty (30) days after written
  notice thereof to the defaulting party. Upon any termination of this
  Agreement, you agree to immediately cease using HTM Studio.

7. **No Warranties; Limitation of Liability.**

  * (a) **No Warranty. HTM Studio is provided “as is” without warranty of any
    kind including without limitation, any warranty of merchantability, fitness
    for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Further, Numenta does not
    warrant results of use or that HTM Studio is bug free or that its use will
    be uninterrupted. The parties agree and acknowledge that NuPIC is an
    early-stage technology and there can be no assurance that either HTM Studio
    or NuPIC will be further developed or improved by Numenta into a
    commercially viable product. No advice or information, whether oral or
    written, obtained from Numenta or elsewhere will create any warranty not
    expressly stated in this Agreement.**

  * (b) **Limitation of Liability. Numenta will have no liability to you under
    this Agreement. In no event will either party be liable for costs of
    procurement of substitute goods, loss of profits, or for any special,
    indirect, consequential or incidental damages, however caused, whether for
    breach of warranty, breach of contract, repudiation of contract, negligence
    or otherwise.**

8. **General.** Once executed, this Agreement takes precedence over the standard
  open source licenses provided at http://numenta.org, http://github.com/numenta
  and https://github.com/numenta/numenta-apps. The terms of this Agreement may
  only be modified by a written agreement signed by both parties. You may not
  assign this Agreement without the prior written consent of Numenta. This
  Agreement will be governed by the laws of the state of California and the
  United States of America. No failure of either party to enforce any of its
  rights under this Agreement will act as a waiver of such rights or of any
  other rights hereunder.
